---
layout: extrapage
title: Cosmin Stejerean (offbytwo)
---

h1. About 

My name is Cosmin Stejerean, and I am a hacker and entrepreneur currently located in Dallas, TX. Before moving to Dallas I spent 9 years living in and around Chicago and 1 year living in Austin, although I spent most of that time working in Dallas. I have a background in software engineering and information security, which I have done professionally since 2004. You can read more about my background on "LinkedIn":http://linkedin.com/in/cosmin. 

I am an advocate of automated testing, continuous integration and iterative development. I believe these practices are important for developing quality software. 

I prefer using open source software and open systems, but I am happy to make exceptions when the closed alternative is significantly better. Whenever possible I try to release most of my work under liberal open source licenses. You can browse some of my projects on "github":http://github.com/offbytwo.

You should follow me on Twitter "here":http://twitter.com/offbytwo.

h1. Technical Interests

I enjoy learning and using new programming languages. For example, during the past year I developed applications commercially using Clojure, Java, Objective-C and Python. When I find the time I would like to learn Erlang, Haskell, OCaml and Scala. I am a fan of functional programming languages and I believe that functional programming will become much more common in the near future.

I'm also really interested in using GPUs to solve computationally intensive problems. I'm particularly interested in using GPUs to solve problems in the computer vision field. 

h1. Other Interests

In addition to writing software I enjoy shooting and editing video, particularly at technical user groups and conferences. I became involved with video after PyCon 2008 where I unknowingly signed up for digitizing 100+ hours of video. I spent the next 4 days shuffling video tapes around the clock, without any sleep. Since then I have been involved in recording "PyCon 2009":http://pycon.blip.tv, "IPhone Camp Atlanta":http://ipca09.blip.tv/ and various user group meeting around Chicago.
